[[GDPR.pdf]]

## The rights behind it
Data protection is a fundamental right as set out in **Article 8 of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights**:
1. Everyone has the right to the protection of personal data concerning him or her. 
2. Such data must be processed fairly for specified purposes and on the basis of the consent of the person concerned or some other legitimate basis laid down by law. Everyone has the right of access to data which has been collected concerning him or her, and the right to have it rectified. 
3. Compliance with these rules shall be subject to control by an independent authority.

## GDPR in Practice
- Came into force in May 2018
- General application to the processing of personal data in the EU
- Sets out:
	1. Obligations on data controllers and processors
	2. Strengthened protections for data subjects
- Applicable as law in all EU member states
- Further effect in national law
	- Data Protection Act 2018 in Ireland

## Key Roles
1. **Data Subject:** any person *whose personal data* is being collected, held, or processed.
2. **Data Processor:** a person, company, or other body which *processes data on behalf* of a data controller
3. **Data Controller:** a person, company, or other body which *decides* the purposes and methods of processing personal data
4. **Supervisory Authority:** All controllers and processors are *accountable* for processing of personal data to this body.

### Supervisory Authority
Independent public authorities responsible for monitoring the application of GDPR in a member state
In Ireland: **Data Protection Commission**

#### 1. Responsible for
Monitoring the application of the GDPR 
in order to protect the rights and freedoms of individuals in relation to processing

#### 2. Roles
1. Promoting public awareness of risks/rules/safeguards/rights
2. Handling data subject complaints
3. Cooperating with other data protection authorities in other EU member states.

## Some definitions
### Personal Data
Any information concerning or relating to a *living person who is either identified or identifiable*

An individual could be identified, *directly or indirectly*, especially by
1. Name, an identification number, location data, an online identifier (such as an IP address), etc
2. One or more factors specific to the physical, physiological, genetic, mental, economic, cultural or social identity of that individual.

#### Special Categories of Personal Data
These are subject to additional protection under GDPR
1. Personal data revealing racial or ethnic origin.
2. Political opinions. 
3. Religious or philosophical beliefs. 
4. Trade union membership. 
5. Genetic data and biometric data processed for the purpose of uniquely identifying a natural person. 
6. Data concerning health. 
7. Data concerning a natural person’s sex life or sexual orientation.

### Data Processing
Any operation or set of operations performed on personal data
Can be automated, manual, or both.
Includes:
1. Storing
2. Collecting
3. Retrieving
4. Using
5. Combining
6. Erasing
7. Destroying

#### Principles for Personal Data Processing
Personal data will be
1. Processed *lawfully, fairly and in a transparent* manner
2. **Purpose limitation:** Collected for *specified, explicit and legitimate purposes* and not further processed in a manner that is incompatible with those purposes
3. **Data minimisation:*** Adequate, relevant and limited* to what is necessary in relation to the purposes for which they are processed
4. **Accuracy:** *Accurate* and, where necessary, kept up to date; every reasonable step must be taken to ensure that personal data that are inaccurate are erased or rectified without delay
5. **Storage limitation:** Kept in a form which permits identification of data subjects for *no longer than is necessary* for the purposes for which the personal data are processed
6. **Integrity and confidentiality:** Processed in a manner that ensures appropriate *security* of the personal data

#### Lawful Basis for Personal Data Processing
Complete list of lawful reasons to process personal data:
1. Consent
2. To carry out a *contract*
3. In order for an organisation to meet a *legal obligation*
4. Where processing the personal data is necessary to protect the *vital interests of a person*. 
5. Where processing the personal data is necessary for the performance of a task carried out in the *public interest*. 
6. In the *legitimate interests of a company/organisation* (except where those interests contradict or harm the interests or rights and freedoms of the individual)

### Consent under GDPR
Some types of processing assume you have given your consent.
Consent must be shown through "a statement or a clear affirmative action" (ie ticking a box)

Consent must be
1. Freely given (can't be forced)
2. Specific 
3. Informed (must be told what purpose(s) your data will be used for)

## Rights under GDPR
### Right of Access
Right to obtain
1. Confirmation as to whether or not your data is being processed
2. If your data is being processed, **a copy** of said data
####  3. Additional information
1. Purpose of the processing
2. Categories of personal data
3. Any recipients of the personal data
	- Especially recipients in other countries, or international organaisations
	- The appropriate safeguards
4. The retention period
	- If not possible, the criteria used to determine the retention period
5. The existence of rights to
	1. Rectification
	2. Erasure
	3. Restrict processing
	4. Object
	5. How to request these from the controller
6. The right to raise a concern with a supervisory authority
7. Where the data wasn't collected from you, where they got the data about you from
8. The existence of automated decision-making, 
	- Including profiling 
	- Meaningful information about how decisions are made, the significance and the consequences of processing

### Right to be Informed
- It should be *clear and transparent* to individuals that 
	- Personal data about them is collected, used, consulted or otherwise processed
	- To what extent the personal data is or will be processed
- **Principal of transparency:** Information on processing of personal data must be
	1. Easily accessible
	2. Easy to understand
	3. In clear and plain language, including visualisations
- Individuals should be made aware of the following in relation to the processing of their data
	1. Risks
	2. Rules
	3. Safeguards
	4. Rights
- Specific purposes why the data is being processed should be explicit, legitimate, and determined at the time of collection

### Right to Rectification
1. If your personal data is incorrect you have the right to have it *rectified* (by the controller, not the processor) without undue delay
2. If your personal data is incomplete, you have the right to have data *completed*, including by means of providing supplementary information

This right is restricted for 
- Objectives of public interests
- Balance with the right of freedom of expression and information

### Right to be Forgotten (Erasure)
You have the right to have your data erased by the data controller in several cases. 
The data controller must communicate any rectification or erasure to each recipient to whom the personal data have been disclosed, and inform you about recipients if requested.

#### Where it applies
1. Where your personal data are *no longer necessary* in relation to the purpose for which it was collected or processed. 
2. Where you *withdraw your consent* to the processing and there is no other lawful basis for processing the data. 
3. Where you *object* to the processing and there is **no overriding legitimate grounds** for continuing the processing or your personal data are being **processed for direct marketing purposes**. 
4. Where your personal data have been *unlawfully processed*.
5. Where your personal data have to be erased in order to comply with a *legal obligation*. 
6. Where your personal data have been collected in relation to the offer of information society services (e.g. *social media*) to a *child*.

##### Exemptions
Where it is necessary for
1. Exercising the right of freedom of expression and information. 
2. Compliance with a legal obligation, the performance of a task carried out in the public interest or in the exercise of official authority. 
3. Reasons of: 
	1. Public interest in the area of public health
	2. Archiving in the public interest
	3. Scientific or historical research purposes or statistical purposes. 
4. Establishment, exercise or defence of legal claims.

### Right to Portability
- In some circumstances, you may be entitled to obtain your personal data from a data controller in a format that makes it easier 
	- to reuse your information in another context, 
	- to transmit this data to another data controller of your choosing without hindrance.
- Only applies where
	- Processing carried out by *automated* means
	- You have *consented*/there is a *contract* between you and the controller
	- It does not affect the rights/freedoms of others
- Where this applies, must provide and transmit personal data in a 
	- structured, commonly used and machine-readable form.

### Rights on Automated Decision Making
Right to not be subject to a decision based solely on automated processing

Processing is “automated” where 
- It is carried out without human intervention
- It produces legal effects or significantly affects you.
- Includes profiling
	- any kind of automated processing of personal data that involves analysing or predicting your behaviour, habits or interests.

#### Automated processing is permitted
1. With explicit consent
2. When necessary for performance of a contract
3. When authorised by Union or Member state law

##### When it is permitted...
Measures **must** be in place to safeguard rights, freedom, and legitimate interests.
May include
1. The right to obtain human intervention on the controller’s part,
2. The right to present your point of view,
3. The right to challenge the decision.

### Right to Object to Processing
Have the right to object to certain types of processing done
1. In the public interest
2. Under official authority
3. In the legitmate interests of others 
	- You have an extra strong right to object if it's for direct marketing
4. For research purposes
	- Unless it's necessary for the performance of a task carried out in the public interest.

Where the right to object applies, data controllers are obliged to notify you of this at the time of their first communication with you. Where processing is carried out online, data controllers must offer an online method to object.

### Right to Restriction
- You have a limited right of restriction of processing of your personal data by a data controller.
- Where this applies:
	- Data can be stored
	- Most other processing actions (eg: deletion) require permission
- Applies in 4 ways
	1. Where you have objected to processing of your data
	2. Where you have contested the accuracy of your data 
	3. Where processing is unlawful. 
	4. Where you require data for the purpose of a legal claim
- Where you have obtained restriction of processing of your data, the data controller must inform you before lifting the restriction


## Limitations on these rights
1. Right to data protection is not an absolute right.
2. It must always be balanced against otheer values, rights, and interests
	- Eg should not affect rights and freedoms of others
3. In limited circumstances, organisations, may *charge* a reasonable fee for responding to a request, or even to *refuse to respond* if it is manifestly unfounded or excessive
4. Organisation must always respond to your requests *within one month*, even if they plan to refuse it.
5. If refusing a request, an organisation must set out clearly which limitation or restriction they are relying, their reasons for for doing so, and the possibility of lodging a complaint.

## Complaining to a Supervisory Authority
Types of complaints:
1. No response to an access request
2. Incomplete response to an access request
3. Exemptions to withhold data being applied incorrectly

### How to complain
Provide the DPC
1. A copy of the access request. 
2. Signed authority from you where a solicitor/representative has made the contact. 
3. A copy of any letter sent to the data controller outlining the specific personal data that has not been provided. 
4. Any evidence you have of the existence of the personal data concerned. 
5. Any other relevant correspondence on the matter. 
6. Exemptions being used to withhold data that may be applied incorrectly

