Serverless computing is a form of CaaS (Container as a Service). 

With Fargate, users don't need to think about the machine resources reserved for the task. Instead, they can just draw the resources they need from a seemingly infinite pool. Fargate manages the task execution and there are no EC2 instances to manage. In the end, you pay for running these tasks.

With Serverless, there are actually still servers involved, but service users don't need to be concerned with them. The packaging of functionality is a Linux Container.

## AWS Lambda
Lambda is an event-driven, serverless container architecture. It reduces the complexity of using containers down to a single function.

### Architecture
The point is that the implementation is not the developer's concern. 

A variety of services, including incoming HTTP requests, trigger Lambda requests. Code is launched into a container on an EC2 instance with an Amazon Linux AMI. The event is then passed into the code.

Lambda is event-driven:
- it can handle image and object uploads to S3
- it can update DynamoDB tables
- it can response to website clicks
- it can react to sensor readings from Internet of Things (IoT)-connected devices

It also can manage custom HTTP requests configured in AWS API Gateway, which can handle authentication and authorisation.

### Function Components
Much of the complexity in Serverless is not in writing the Lambda function, but in deploying it in the right environment with the correct event triggers and authorizations. Frameworks like Claudia.js and Serverless simplify this:
- They create a functioning Node.js locally, then invoke the "Deploy" step, which packages everything into a .zip file and uploads it to AWS Lambda.

In practice, JavaScript frameworks hide the complexity and reduce the time to develop and deploy, which is why they're used.

### Creating a Lambda Function
First, specify the function name and execution environment (e.g., Node, Ruby, Python, etc.). This invokes the Cloud9 Editor, an online IDE. This all allows functions to be input and simple tests to be performed.

Next, add event triggers. There are a large selection of things happening within an AWS environment that can trigger the calling of a Lambda function.

If programming a web REST API, the API gateway will field the HTTP requests and convert them into events before calling the Lambda function.

### Pricing
Charges are based on the number of invocations and the intensity of each invocation.

S3 or DynamoDB charges are separate. 
#### Invocations:
First 1 million invocations/month are free
$0.20 per 1 million requests thereafter at $0.0000002 per request.

#### Intensity
Intensity is measured in GB seconds. It is the product of memory allocated and seconds of CPU time.

First 400,000 GB-seconds/month are free.
$0.0000166667 for every GB-second used thereafter
Minimum memory of 128MB per instance.

#### Example
If your Lambda@Edge function executed 10 million times in one month, and it ran for 50ms each time, your charges would be calculated as follows: 

***Monthly compute charges*** 
The monthly compute price is $0.00000625125 per 128MB-second 

Total compute (seconds) = 10M * (0.05sec) = 500,000 seconds 
Monthly compute charges = 500,000 * $0.00000625125 = $3.13 

***Monthly request charges*** 
The monthly request price is $0.60 per 1 million requests. 
Monthly request charges = 10M * $0.6/M = $6.00 

***Total monthly charges*** 
Total charges = Compute charges + Request charges = $3.13 + $6.00 = $9.13 per month

### Serverless Lambda FaaS
(Function as a Service)
The intention is to package up useful work as a "function". Cloud environments facilitate connecting events to the function (via web, IoT, messaging, etc.). The user does not and should not have to worry about computing resources or scaling. Pricing is based on function invocations; "useful" work done.

#### Differences between FaaS and PaaS
- Both hide "servers" from developers
- Both scale up by booting up more server processes (which they charge for)
- PaaS typically always has at least one server process running that receives external requests. 
- FaaS has no server processes constantly being run
	- You still pay for function execution time, but idle time is not processed

## Alternate approach
An alternate approach is to manage the hardware like software by using IaC (infrastructure as code). This would involve using machine-readable definition files and managing and provisioning computer data centre resources.

An example of this is AWS CloudFormation, which uses JSON or YAML.
Another is Terraform, which uses JSON or HashiCorp Configuration Language (HCL).