In a browser, a loaded HTML file can contain several independent `<script>` tags which are loaded in order into a single global scope. Tools such as Webpack, a **module bundler,** take programs developed as separate modules and pack them into a single HTML file.

## Node.js
Modularisation using the **CommonJS** style was one of the earliest methods, but has since been superseded.

### How it worked
Each JavaScript file became a module. Each of these files can explicitly decide what to export by adding it to their `modules.exports` array. The consumer module can import all of these exports using the `require` function. This works fine with Node.js, but not in the browser, so an EMCAScript standard module interface was introduced in ECMAScript in 2015 - ES Modules. New keywords were added like `export` and `import` and in Node.js, module files now have the extension `.mjs`.

### Package Manager (NPM)
The Node Package Manager (NPM) is a package manager for Node. 
:)
It uses an online database of packages and is controlled through the command line. It adds a `package.json` file describing the package.

## Callback Pattern
JavaScript is single threaded, so callbacks are used extensively for asynchronous coding.

## Express
Express is a very common framework for building web-based applications that uses callbacks extensively.

## Promises
JavaScript uses callbacks frequently, but promises are gaining in popularity too.

```js
let p = new Promise(/*<executor function>*/);
```

The executor function is a function that contains (usually blocking) actions that will complete eventually.

A promise is either
- pending
- fulfilled
- rejected

Generally, you put something into an executor function which might take a while. There are often things you want to get done after the promise's work is finished (fulfilled or rejected), so you can queue these up in a chain of processing tasks using `.then` syntax. This takes up to 2 arguments.

```js
p.then(onFulfilled, onRejected);
```
When the promise is resolved, wither `onFulfilled()` or `onRejected()` will call with the value of the promise. The `.then` call also returns a promise on which another `.then` can be invoked, allowing for a chain of promises.