API stands for "Application Programming Interface". It has the features:

- Client-Server Architecture
	- separate client and server concerns
- Statelessness
	- The server shouldn't maintain state information for each client
	- The same request should get the same response
- Cacheability
	- Responses should be cacheable where possible
- Layered system
	- The client should not be able to distinguish between a real server and a proxy
- Code on demand (optional)
	- Servers can extend client functionality

## RESTful APIs
Four constraints of RESTful APIs are:
- Identification of resources
	- Typically a 1-1 mapping of a URI to a resource
- Manipulation of resources
	- CRUD
		- Create, Read, Update, Delete
- Self-descriptive messages
- Hypermedia as the engine of application state
	- Hypermedia is a medium of information that includes graphics, audio, video, plain text and [hyperlinks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hyperlink "Hyperlink").

All of this makes for a ***uniform interface***. In short, you have:
- **identification of resources** - You use the URI (IRI) standard to identify a resource. In this case, a resource is a web document.

- **Manipulation of resources through these representations** - You use the HTTP standard to describe communication. So for example GET means that you want to retrieve data about the URI-identified resource. You can describe an operation with an HTTP method and a URI.

- **Self-descriptive messages** - You use standard MIME types and (standard) [RDF vocabs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/RDF) to make messages self-descriptive. So the client can find the data by checking the semantics, and it doesn't have to know the application-specific data structure the service uses.

- **Hypermedia as the engine of application state** (a.k.a. HATEOAS) - You use hyperlinks and possibly [URI templates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/URI_Template) to decouple the client from the application-specific URI structure. You can annotate these hyperlinks with semantics e.g. [IANA link relations](https://www.iana.org/assignments/link-relations/link-relations.xhtml), so the client will understand what they mean.

## Typical Structure of APIs
A RESTful API will typically give access to individually identified resources, e.g. `GET /photos/425`. The REST architectural style makes use of standards such as HTTP, URI, and JSON.

A common pattern is CRUD: **Create/Read/Update/Delete**.
- Create -> POST
	- Creates a resource
- Read -> GET
	- Reads the resource
- Update -> PUT
	- Updates a resource. It is idempotent (multiple calls will have the same result)
- Delete -> DELETE
	- Deletes a resource

## REST
REST is short for "*R*epresentational *S*tate *T*ransfer". The server transfers a representation of the state of the resource, typically in JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) or some other format.

That REST is stateless means the server doesn't need to keep track of the client's state, which is good for a many-one relationship, caching, and scaling out. The client transfers a representation of its own state with each request, if relevant.

This is a good pattern because:
- It is scalable
- It leads to a loose or lightweight coupling between the client and sever
- It is suitable for Internet-scale usage

There are other popular styles of web APIs:
- SOAP - Simple Object Access Protocol
- GraphQL

## Express
The Express framework is a server-side framework built for Node.js. 