## Model-View-Controller Paradigm
The MVC paradigm is a software architectural pattern commonly used for developing user interfaces. It was developed in the 1970's and was applied to web applications.

It helps add structure to a web application by dividing functionality into:
- **Model**
	- The basic data that an app is dealing with
- **View**
	- Represents something a user sees, which is derived from the underlying data. There could be multiple different views of the same model.
- **Controller**
	- Represents the business logic that controls the application and moves from one view to another

## Example Frameworks
### AngularJS
An unsupported open-source framework using the MVC paradigm. Since 2016, there is an Angular framework which is a ground-up rewrite of AngularJS done in TypeScript.

### React
React was developed by a community of developers and is maintained by Meta. It uses a copy of the DOM so that rendering can be minimized on update.

### Vue.js
A lightweight fork of AngularJS. Will touch on more [[#Vue|soon...]]

### Next.js
A back-end framework used for enabling React-based web applications.

### Svelte
Compiles HTML templates and manipulates the DOM directly.

# Vue
Vue uses **declarative rendering** which extends standard HTML. It uses template syntax to declaratively describe HTML output based on the JavaScript state. It is also **reactive** and automatically tracks JavaScript state changes, efficiently updating the DOM using a virtual DOM.

It can be drawn from a Content Distribution Network (CDN):
```html
<script src="https://unpkg.com/vue@3/dist/vue.global.js"></script>
```

Browsers load Vue code from the web, usually via CDN. The Vue component has:
- a 'data' section - all variables here are made "reactive"
- the HTML uses Moustache syntax (curly braces) which allows variable names to be picked up from JavaScript (also called **one-way binding**)

```html
<div>
	<h1>Today is {{day_0_weather.date}}</h1>
	<h3>in {{userPlace}} </h3>
	<h2>{{day_0_weather.temp}}째C, {{day_0_weather.weather_title}}</h2>
	<h5>{{day_0_weather.min_temp}}째C/{{day_0_weather.max_temp}}째C </h5>
	<h4>Feels like {{day_0_weather.feels_like}}째C </h4>
</div>
```

Vue is a "progressive" framework, which means its flexible and incrementally adoptable.

### Vue HTML Directives
#### v-if (v-else-if, v-else)
Toggles the presence of an element. Works with `v-else-if` and `v-else`.

```html
<h2 v-if="index==0">Today</h2>
<h2 v-else-if="index==1">Tomorrow</h2>
<h2 v-else>{{forecast.date}}</h2>

```

#### v-for
Allows for iteration within an element.

`for i`:
```html
<div v-for="(forecast, index) in daily_forecast.weather" :key="index">
	<h2>{{forecast.temp}}</h2> <br>
</div>
```

`foreach`:
```html
<ol> 
	<li v-for="item of list"> 
		{{ item }} 
	</li> 
</ol>
```

#### v-on
Allows event handlers to be connected.

`v-on`:
```html
<button v-on:click="list.reverse()">Reverse List</button>
```

`@`:
```html
<button @click="list.reverse()">Reverse List</button>
```

#### v-model
Two-way binding; allows input to update the variable value.

```html
<input v-model="cityName" v-on:keyup.enter="NewWeather">
```


