**XaaS** - "X" as a Service
**SaaS** - Software as a Service


AWS was originally Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS), using EC2 -- Amazon's Elastic Compute Cloud. IaaS is using a company's servers and software to host your own data.

## EC2
EC2 has virtual hardware and software machines. It has competitive pricing.

### Virtual Machine
The user can choose to instantiate a virtual machine (VM) of a given type of hardware with a given type of software. The instance they choose depends on their application's needs, e.g., fast CPU or lots of memory. Each machine instance is launched within a "Security Group". The Security Group can be created live using the launch wizard or pre-configured.

CPUs can "burst" using a system of CPU credits/hour. Instances accumulate these credits when idle and consume them when busy. Instances are allocated multiples of 3 credits, which doubles every hour.

Each Virtual CPU (vCPU) is equivalent to one Intel Xeon Core or Hyperthread, depending on the instance. Memory and Networking also depends on the instance.

### The Machine Image
Each machine is created with a local enduring storage. The operating system and installed software constitute the Amazon Machine Image (AMI). Software licence fees can be included in the cost of running an instance.

### Cost
Amazon provides low cost options for businesses compared to the price of running their own hardware. Cost control is an important concern, as the ease of scaling could lead to costs increasing unintentionally.

### Disk Storage
Local hard disks -- SSDs -- are provided by Elastic Block Store (EBS) images. By default, each created machine instance gets one disk (Linux AMIs default to 8GB). After an instance is stopped, the user is still charged rental for the EBS store until the instance is fully terminated. Charges are based on location and space used over time.

### Storage Hierarchy
**Elastic Block Store (EBS)**
- Fast storage
- Can specify speed of access
- Intended for short-term storage

**Simple Storage Service (S3)**
- Standard for larger and longer-term storage
- Various flavours based on frequency or speed of access

**Glacier**
- A slow, cheap (tape-based) storage for end-of-life data
- Suitable for archival storage


## S3
Simple Storage Service (S3) was introduced in 2006 and is used to store Objects, which are grouped into Buckets. Buckets must be given unique names across AWS. It's much cheaper than EBS.

A bucket can contain objects identified by a Key, which is its name. The bucket has no internal structure (like a Dictionary or HashMap) but the AWS interface supports folders using a '/' in the name.

Access control can be applied at the Bucket and Object level using a REST-style CRUD interface. There is also a wrapped API available called AWS-SDK for Node.js.

Factors in choosing a location are:
- if low latency is required
- if a region should be close to a user

Machine instances can be added to a load-balancing group, which means their load is passed through a LB (load balancer) node. 

Application-level load balancing is done at **OSI layer 7** and each HTTP request is routed to different nodes.

Network-level load balancing has incoming TCP and UDP connections routed to different nodes.

## Scaling
Scaling a service can be done manually or by establishing an auto-scaler and adding VMs to the group. The auto-scaler will terminate "unhealthy" instances ("health" is determined manually) and will start more to maintained the desired number of instances. It's common to use multiple 'availability zones' so the service will survive failure of an entire data centre.

## Cloud Database Services
Database speed, reliability, and cost are major pillars of most networked applications. People have been using their own privately run databases based on technology like SQL or noSQL.

### DynamoDB
DynamoDB is a noSQL database service offered by AWS. At its highest level, it operates as a Key:Value store, storing items in tables with one or a combination of attributes stored as a primary key. Tables are partitioned for high availability, reliability, and performance.

DynamoDB can handle 10 trillion requests per day and support peaks of more than 20 million requests per second. Its read performance is very high and cheap, though its write performance is lower and more expensive. It has "Eventual Consistency" turned on by default, which can be replaced with "Strong Consistency" for lower performance and higher cost (why would you do this then??).

DynamoDB is accessible from JavaScript.

```javascript
// Load the AWS SDK for Node.js 
var AWS = require('aws-sdk'); 
// Set the region 
AWS.config.update({region: 'REGION'}); 

// Create the DynamoDB service object 
var ddb = new AWS.DynamoDB({apiVersion: '2012-08-10'}); 
var params = { 
	AttributeDefinitions: [ { 
		AttributeName: 'CUSTOMER_ID', 
		AttributeType: 'N' 
	}, { 
		AttributeName: 'CUSTOMER_NAME', 
		AttributeType: 'S' 
	} ]
}
```