A database is an organised collection of data. It's a type of data store. 

Database Management Systems (DBMS) are a common type of software used to manage databases. 

The database system consists of:
- the database model
- DBMS
- database

## Database Models
The logical structure of a common database is the **relational model**. It uses s table-based format. Data is represented in terms of tuple rows with a set of attribute values in each column. The name of the row is the **primary key**. The data is grouped into relations Relational databases often use SQL (Structured Query Language) to access data. Schema defines the organisation of the data.

### NoSQL
The popularity of relational databases led to a name emphasising a database that is not relational.

NoSQL does not require a schema. It offers rapid scalability, the ability to manage large unstructured data sets, offers simpler "horizontal" scaling, allows clusters of machines, and it suited to cloud hosting (e.g., DynamoDB, MongoDB, Google Bigtable, etc.). It reduced "object-relational impedance mismatch". It often uses Key-Value databases.

### Polyglot Persistence
Polyglot persistence refers to using multiple data storage technologies within a single system, in order to meet varying data storage needs.

Databases using this model could be
- relational
- NoSQL
- graph (GDB)
	- uses graph data structures
	- NoSQL is a graph database
- in-memory
	- runs on main memory, faster than others

### Other Concepts
#### ACID
Atomicity, consistency, isolation, durability.
These are properties of database transactions.

#### Partition
Division of a logical database. It has:
- manageability
- performance
- availability
- load balancing


## DynamoDB
DynamoDB is a NoSQL database accessed via a REST API. 

### Keys
It has two types of primary keys:
- Partition key
	- A key used to select specific columns
- Composite primary key
	- Consists of a partition key and sort key
		- data under a partition key is sorted by the sort key value

For example,
**AnimalType** is a partition key, and **Name** is a sort key. Together, they make up a **composite primary key**. The role this key attribute will take on is referred to as its "keytypes".

### Data Type
DynamoDB has the following data types:
- S - String
- N - Number
- B - Binary
- BOOL - Boolean
- NULL - Null
- M - Map
- L - List
- SS - String set
- NS - Number set
- BS - Binary set

### Data Structure
Data is structures in:
- Tables
	- Items
		- Attributes

Attributes are fundamental data elements that cannot be broken down any further ("atomic").

### Security
DynamoDB is simulated locally on your machine. To run an actual DynamoDB, you will need an access key retrieved from the AWS console.

## Other Cloud Computing Architectures
- Microsoft Azure
- Google Compute Engine